ILISP HISTORY

90/12/30 Version 4.00 released

IMPROVEMENTS: Process stuff has been rewritten and much improved.  If
you prefer the old eval/compile behavior, set lisp-wait-p to t in your
ilisp-load-hook.  Improved edit-definitions and edit-callers so that
they support multiple definitions of any LISP object even if the
inferior LISP does not store the information.  Added support for
Epoch.  Separated out lisp-mode extensions, symlink fix, source stuff
and batch eval/compile.  Lots of minor improvements, see details
below.

INCOMPATIBLE CHANGES: Renamed interactive functions to put package
specification at the end so that names were quicker to specify and
some internal functions so that they were unique to ilisp.
ilisp-clisp now takes the full file name.  ilisp-load-or-send-command
now takes the binary and source paths explicitly.  The ilisp- prefix
was removed from dialect file names.  ilisp-definition-regexp has gone
away.  ilisp-prompt, ilisp-fix-error and ilisp-continue have gone away
in favor of the actual comint- variables.  ilisp-expand-symlinks has
gone away. 

DETAILS: Finally fixed up how many newlines are inserted.  Made it so
that the source file stuff would use a resident buffer with the same
name if available.  Added ilisp-filter-length to the input filter.
When reading a symbol, the inferior lisp is no longer queried with an
empty string.  newline-and-indent-ilisp will send a string w/o a new
line if called at the end of a buffer.  This was so that raw character
i/o could be done in some lisps.  All comint and comint-ipc variables
can now be set in hooks and the right thing will happen.  Made
lisp-end-defun-text skip over leading comments.  Added the functions
search-in-lisp-files and replace-in-lisp-files.  Prevented the
addition of duplicate entries to the input ring and expanded its size
to 200 entries.  Made lisp-def-name so that it adds the name of the
defining form and returns an empty string at the end of a buffer.
Swapped bindings of macroexpand-lisp and macroexpand-1-lisp.  Fixed
expand-file-name bug if // was at the start of a filename.  Fixed
obscure bug in make-local-variable.  Added ilisp-other-prompt and
bol-ilisp.  Added case-fold-search to appropriate places.  Fixed error
recovery in ilisp-completer.  Removed extra parentheses in the string
for ilisp-init-binary-command.  Added documentation on scrolling the
popper window backwards.  Fixed comment-region so that it handles
empty lines and deleting spaces at the start.  Fixed behavior of
reindent-lisp on comments at the start and end of a buffer.  Saved the
point in reposition-window-lisp.  Rewrote close-all-lisp so that it
inserted a bracket if in a string and was better behaved WRT non sexp
brackets and so that it could close all brackets.  Removed breaks in
lisp-end-defun-text for unclosed strings.  Added comint-check-prompt
to comint-ipc so that dialects can be smarter about errors.  Added
ilisp-check-prompt and allegro and lucid definitions.  Changed
edit-callers so that it uses the name of the current defun as its
default.  Changed popper so that it handles more windows, removes
trailing lines, is nicer about bindings and added popper-grow-output.
Also added epoch-pop for epoch.  Made lisp-input-start work if the
point was at the start of the line the prompt was on.  This made
reindent-lisp and close-all-lisp work in ilisp mode.  Added
close-and-send-lisp.  Made it so that bindings are only done after the
hooks are run.  Shorter clisp error messages.  Removed
ilisp-definition-regexp and replaced it with ilisp-locator.  Made
message optional in ilisp-send and ilisp-send-string.  Added a startup
message to ilisp buffers.  Made it so that there is filename
completion when prompting for lisp program.  Fixed bug in
ilisp-load-init.  Made it so that if an eval/compile worked normally,
no message was displayed.  Fixed lucid ilisp-list-callers so that it
does not recurse forever.  Changed lisp-list-callers to who-calls-lisp
and made it so that it would display the buffer.  Added ilisp-dialect
as a list of dialect names for the inferior LISP.  Added partial
minibuffer completion.  Improved filename completion help in
complete-lisp.  Added ilisp-bug for bug reporting. Improved case
handling for clisp.  popper v2.00, completer v2.00.

10/12/90 Version 3.0 released.  Improved pop-up windows, symbol
completion, package handling, compilation and initialization.
Changed default binding prefix.  Added trace/untrace and
evaluation of defvars.
  
 8/22/90 Version 2.0 released. Fixed bugs and changed initialization.

 6/11/90 Version 1.0 released.
