\input texinfo  @c -*- Mode: TexInfo; Fill-Column: 78 -*-
@setfilename continue.info
@paragraphindent 0
@tex
\global\leftskip=-0.5in
\global\rightskip=-0.5in
\global\parskip=8pt
\global\smallskipamount=8pt
@end tex
@flushright
@ifinfo
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
@end ifinfo
@tex
\vskip-1.05in
@end tex
@b{Jamie Zawinski}
@b{jwz@@lucid.com}
810 San Luis Road
Berkeley, CA  94707-2053
(510) 527-2369
@ifinfo
------------------------------------------------------------------------

@end ifinfo
@end flushright
@b{EMPLOYMENT OBJECTIVE}
@quotation
To improve people's lives through software.  My interests include user
interface design, programming tools, graphics, information management,
privacy, security, and the net in general.
@end quotation

@b{EXPERIENCE}
@itemize @bullet
@item
@b{Scientist, Lucid, Inc.}, @i{Menlo Park, CA}@*
June 1990 - present.

Primary developer and maintainer of @i{Lucid Emacs}, a popular version of the
GNU Emacs text editor for Unix.  Lucid Emacs has much better integration with
the X window system, and many user interface improvements, including multiple
fonts, multiple windows, and inline graphics.  Designed and implemented an
extensible menubar, popup menu, and dialog box facility; redesigned and
reimplemented the underlying command loop for more general keyboard and mouse
handling; integrated with the Motif, Xt, and Open Look Intrinsics toolkits.

Coordinated and directed the testing of Lucid Emacs by nearly a hundred beta
testers across the network.  Handled the release and distribution of Lucid
Emacs both through Lucid's release process and to the network at large.

Managed mailing lists and USENET newsgroups devoted to user discussion of the
editor (best estimates place these newsgroups at 30,000-40,000 readers.)
Tracked user bugs and worked closely with users to integrate their fixes and
improvements back into the distribution.

Integrated Lucid Emacs with the @i{Energize Programming System}, a development
environment for C and C++.  Lucid Emacs comprises the primary user interface
to Energize.

Implemented an optimizing byte-compiler for Emacs Lisp.

Wrote and distributed numerous X programs, including: @i{xkeycaps}, a
graphical utility that lets the user interactively re-map their keyboard
without having to learn the complex syntax of the standard X
keyboard-remapping tool; @i{xdaliclock}, a morphing digital clock;
@i{xscreensaver}, a highly extensible screen saver and locker, and a number 
of graphics demos to go with it.

Implemented BBDB (the @i{Insidious Big Brother Database}), a rolodex-like
system for tracking names, phone numbers, addresses, and email addresses, and
any other person-oriented information.  BBDB tightly integrates with the
various Emacs-based mail and news readers, and is highly automatable and
extensible - it tends to silently ``notice'' information that passes by
without explicit interaction by the user, so that the information is readily
available later.

Wrote @i{audio-tape.ps}, a popular program for printing labels for the boxes
of audio tapes of all varieties, implemented entirely in PostScript.  It
includes dozens of options, complicated automatic text-sizing features, and
the ability to include arbitrary graphics on the labels.

Worked on QLISP, a futures-based multiprocessor version of Lucid Common Lisp
running on an 8 processor Alliant Concentrix.  Implemented a more efficient
kind of process object to take better advantage of parallelism.

Worked on porting Lucid Common Lisp to new architectures.

Represented Lucid at several trade shows.

@item
@b{Programmer/Analyst, University of California}, @i{Berkeley, CA}@*
August 1989 - June 1990.

Member of a small research group developing a natural language help system.
Implemented a relation-based knowledge representation language, and performed
various system software maintenance and tools development tasks on Texas
Instruments Explorer Lisp Machines.

@item
@b{Software Engineer, Expert Technologies Inc.}, @i{Pittsburgh, PA}@*
May 1986 - August 1989.

Member of the team that designed and implemented an expert system for the
automatic pagination of the Yellow Pages on TI Explorers.

Designed and implemented a window toolkit which allowed the use of a
Macintosh-like user interface on top of the Explorer ``tiled'' window system.

Designed and implemented a hierarchical frames system for use as a general
purpose database.  Built on this an application which allowed the pagination
system to store its hierarchy of rules and parameters.  Implemented a complex
frame and tree editor, including an undo facility, and a mechanism for editing
the source code of rules.

Implemented a device-independent document processing system similar to the
@i{Scribe} document processing language.  This was written in portable Common
Lisp and included support for PostScript output, as well as the ability to
generate hypertext documents for the Explorer online manual browsing system.

@item
@b{Programmer, Spice Lisp Project, Carnegie Mellon University}, 
@i{Pittsburgh, PA}@*
April 1985 - May 1986.

Worked on the implementation of @i{Hemlock}, an Emacs-like text editor
implemented in Spice Lisp (now CMU Common Lisp) on a Perq Systems workstation.
@end itemize

@b{SKILLS}
@quotation
Very experienced with C, Lisp, PostScript, and the Flavors and CLOS object
systems.  Some experience with assembly languages.

Very knowledgeable about UNIX, X, Emacs, Lisp Machines, and lisp internals
in general.

Efficiency, modularity, robustness.  Purity of Essence.
@end quotation
@bye
@c  LocalWords:  setfilename paragraphindent leftskip rightskip parskip ifinfo
@c  LocalWords:  allskipamount flushright vskip morphing QLISP Concentrix Perq
@c  LocalWords:  CLOS Alliant
