
@node Rmail, Calendar/Diary, Sending Mail, Top
@chapter Reading Mail With Rmail
@cindex Rmail
@cindex message
@findex rmail

  Rmail is an Emacs subsystem for reading and disposing of mail that you
receive.  Rmail stores mail messages in files called Rmail files.  You read
the messages in an Rmail file in a special major mode, Rmail mode,
which redefines most letters to run commands for managing mail.  To enter
Rmail, type @kbd{M-x rmail}.  This reads your primary mail file, merges
new mail in from your inboxes, displays the first new message, and lets
you begin reading.

@cindex primary mail file
  Using Rmail in the simplest fashion, you have one Rmail file,
@file{~/RMAIL}, in which all of your mail is saved.  It is called your
@dfn{primary mail file}.  You can also copy messages into other Rmail
files and then edit those files with Rmail.

  Rmail displays only one message at a time.  It is called the
@dfn{current message}.  Rmail mode's special commands can move to
another message, delete the message, copy the message into another file,
or send a reply.

@cindex message number
  Within the Rmail file, messages are arranged sequentially in order
of receipt.  They are also assigned consecutive integers as their
@dfn{message numbers}.  The number of the current message is displayed
in Rmail's mode line, followed by the total number of messages in the
file.  You can move to a message by specifying its message number
using the @kbd{j} key (@pxref{Rmail Motion}).

@kindex s (Rmail)
@findex rmail-save
  Following the usual conventions of Emacs, changes in an Rmail file become
permanent only when the file is saved.  You can do this with @kbd{s}
(@code{rmail-save}), which also expunges deleted messages from the file
first (@pxref{Rmail Deletion}).  To save the file without expunging, use
@kbd{C-x C-s}.  Rmail saves the Rmail file automatically when moving new
mail from an inbox file (@pxref{Rmail Inbox}).

@kindex q (Rmail)
@findex rmail-quit
  You can exit Rmail with @kbd{q} (@code{rmail-quit}); this expunges and
saves the Rmail file and then switches to another buffer.  However, there is
no need to `exit' formally.  If you switch from Rmail to editing in
other buffers, and never happen to switch back, you have exited.  Just
make sure to save the Rmail file eventually (like any other file you
have changed).  @kbd{C-x s} is a good enough way to do this
(@pxref{Saving}).

@menu
* Scroll: Rmail Scrolling.   Scrolling through a message.
* Motion: Rmail Motion.      Moving to another message.
* Deletion: Rmail Deletion.  Deleting and expunging messages.
* Inbox: Rmail Inbox.        How mail gets into the Rmail file.
* Files: Rmail Files.        Using multiple Rmail files.
* Output: Rmail Output.	     Copying message out to files.
* Labels: Rmail Labels.      Classifying messages by labeling them.
* Summary: Rmail Summary.    Summaries show brief info on many messages.
* Reply: Rmail Reply.        Sending replies to messages you are viewing.
* Editing: Rmail Editing.    Editing message text and headers in Rmail.
* Digest: Rmail Digest.      Extracting the messages from a digest message.
@end menu

@node Rmail Scrolling, Rmail Motion, Rmail, Rmail
@section Scrolling Within a Message

  When Rmail displays a message that does not fit on the screen, you
have to scroll through it.  You could use @kbd{C-v}, @kbd{M-v},
and @kbd{M-<}, but scrolling is so frequent in Rmail that it deserves to be
easier to type.

@table @kbd
@item @key{SPC}
Scroll forward (@code{scroll-up}).
@item @key{DEL}
Scroll backward (@code{scroll-down}).
@item .
Scroll to start of message (@code{rmail-beginning-of-message}).
@end table

@kindex SPC (Rmail)
@kindex DEL (Rmail)
  Since the most common thing to do while reading a message is to scroll
through it by screenfuls, Rmail makes @key{SPC} and @key{DEL} synonyms of
@kbd{C-v} (@code{scroll-up}) and @kbd{M-v} (@code{scroll-down})

@kindex . (Rmail)
@findex rmail-beginning-of-message
  The command @kbd{.} (@code{rmail-beginning-of-message}) scrolls back to the
beginning of a selected message.  This is not quite the same as @kbd{M-<}:
first, it does not set the mark; secondly, it resets the buffer
boundaries to the current message if you have changed them.

@node Rmail Motion, Rmail Deletion, Rmail Scrolling, Rmail
@section Moving Among Messages

  The most basic thing to do with a message is to read it.  The way to
do this in Rmail is to make the message current.  You can make any
message current, given its message number, by using the @kbd{j} command, but
people most often move sequentially through the file, since this is the
order of receipt of messages.  When you enter Rmail, you are positioned
at the first new message (new messages are those received after you last
used Rmail), or at the last message if there are no new messages this
time.  Move forward to see other new messages if there are any; move
backward to re-examine old messages.

@table @kbd
@item n
Move to the next non-deleted message, skipping any intervening deleted @*
messages (@code{rmail-next-undeleted-message}).
@item p
Move to the previous non-deleted message @*
(@code{rmail-previous-undeleted-message}).
@item M-n
Move to the next message, including deleted messages
(@code{rmail-next-message}).
@item M-p
Move to the previous message, including deleted messages
(@code{rmail-previous-message}).
@item j
Move to the first message.  With argument @var{n}, move to
message number @var{n} (@code{rmail-show-message}).
@item >
Move to the last message (@code{rmail-last-message}).

@item M-s @var{regexp} @key{RET}
Move to the next message containing a match for @var{regexp}
(@code{rmail-search}).  If @var{regexp} is empty, the last regexp used is
used again.

@item - M-s @var{regexp} @key{RET}
Move to the previous message containing a match for @var{regexp}.
If @var{regexp} is empty, the last regexp used is used again.
@end table

@kindex n (Rmail)
@kindex p (Rmail)
@kindex M-n (Rmail)
@kindex M-p (Rmail)
@findex rmail-next-undeleted-message
@findex rmail-previous-undeleted-message
@findex rmail-next-message
@findex rmail-previous-message
  To move among messages in Rmail, you can use @kbd{n} and @kbd{p}.
These keys move through the messages sequentially but skip over deleted
messages, which is usually what you want to do.  Their command
definitions are named @code{rmail-next-undeleted-message} and
@code{rmail-previous-undeleted-message}.  If you do not want to skip
deleted messages---for example, if you want to move to a message to
undelete it---use the variants @kbd{M-n} (@code{rmail-next-message}) and
@kbd{M-p} (@code{rmail-previous-message}).  A numeric argument to any of
these commands serves as a repeat count.@refill

  In Rmail, you can specify a numeric argument by just typing the digits.
It is not necessary to type @kbd{C-u} first.

@kindex M-s (Rmail)
@findex rmail-search
  The @kbd{M-s} (@code{rmail-search}) command is Rmail's version of
search.  The usual incremental search command @kbd{C-s} works in Rmail,
but searches only within the current message.  The purpose of @kbd{M-s}
is to search for another message.  It reads a regular expression
(@pxref{Regexps}) non-incrementally, then starts searching at the
beginning of the following message for a match.  The message containing
the match is selected.

  To search backward in the file for another message, give @kbd{M-s} a
negative argument.  In Rmail you can do this with @kbd{- M-s}.

  It is also possible to search for a message based on labels.
@xref{Rmail Labels}.

@kindex j (Rmail)
@kindex > (Rmail)
@findex rmail-show-message
@findex rmail-last-message
  To move to a message specified by absolute message number, use @kbd{j}
(@code{rmail-show-message}) with the message number as argument.  With
no argument, @kbd{j} selects the first message.  @kbd{>}
(@code{rmail-last-message}) selects the last message.

@node Rmail Deletion, Rmail Inbox, Rmail Motion, Rmail
@section Deleting Messages

@cindex deletion (Rmail)
  When you no longer need to keep a message, you can @dfn{delete} it.  This
flags it as ignorable, and some Rmail commands will pretend it is no longer
present, but it still has its place in the Rmail file and still has its
message number.

@cindex expunging (Rmail)
  @dfn{Expunging} the Rmail file actually removes the deleted messages.
The remaining messages are renumbered consecutively.  Expunging is the only
action that changes the message number of any message, except for
undigestifying (@pxref{Rmail Digest}).

@table @kbd
@item d
Delete the current message and move to the next non-deleted message
(@code{rmail-delete-forward}).
@item C-d
Delete the current message and move to the previous non-deleted
message (@code{rmail-delete-backward}).
@item u
Undelete the current message, or move back to a deleted message and
undelete it (@code{rmail-undelete-previous-message}).
@item e
@itemx x
Expunge the Rmail file (@code{rmail-expunge}).  These two
commands are synonyms.
@end table

@kindex d (Rmail)
@kindex C-d (Rmail)
@findex rmail-delete-forward
@findex rmail-delete-backward
  There are two Rmail commands for deleting messages.  Both delete the
current message and select another message.  @kbd{d}
(@code{rmail-delete-forward}) moves to the following message, skipping
messages already deleted, while @kbd{C-d} (@code{rmail-delete-backward})
moves to the previous non-deleted message.  If there is no non-deleted
message to move to in the specified direction, the message that was just
deleted remains current.

@cindex undeletion (Rmail)
@kindex e (Rmail)
@findex rmail-expunge
  To make all deleted messages disappear from the Rmail file, type
@kbd{e} (@code{rmail-expunge}).  Until you do this, you can still
@dfn{undelete} the deleted messages.

@kindex u (Rmail)
@findex rmail-undelete-previous-message
  To undelete, type
@kbd{u} (@code{rmail-undelete-previous-message}), which cancels the
effect of a @kbd{d} command (usually).  It undeletes the current message
if the current message is deleted.  Otherwise it moves backward to previous
messages until a deleted message is found, and undeletes that message.

  You can usually undo a @kbd{d} with a @kbd{u} because the @kbd{u}
moves back to and undeletes the message that the @kbd{d} deleted.  This
does not work when the @kbd{d} skips a few already-deleted messages that
follow the message being deleted; in that case the @kbd{u} command
undeletes the last of the messages that were skipped.  There is no clean
way to avoid this problem.  However, by repeating the @kbd{u} command,
you can eventually get back to the message you intended to
undelete.  You can also reach that message with @kbd{M-p} commands and
then type @kbd{u}.@refill

  A deleted message has the @samp{deleted} attribute, and as a result
@samp{deleted} appears in the mode line when the current message is
deleted.  In fact, deleting or undeleting a message is nothing more than
adding or removing this attribute.  @xref{Rmail Labels}.

@node Rmail Inbox, Rmail Files, Rmail Deletion, Rmail
@section Rmail Files and Inboxes
@cindex inbox file

  Unix places your incoming mail in a file called your @dfn{inbox}.
When you start up Rmail, it copies the new messages from your inbox into
your primary mail file, an Rmail file which also contains other messages
saved from previous Rmail sessions.  In this file, you actually
read the mail with Rmail.  The operation is called @dfn{getting new mail}.
You can repeat it at any time using the @kbd{g} key in Rmail.  The inbox
file name is @file{/usr/spool/mail/@var{username}} in Berkeley Unix,
@file{/usr/mail/@var{username}} in system V.

  There are two reason for having separate Rmail files and inboxes.

@enumerate
@item
The format in which Unix delivers the mail in the inbox is not
adequate for Rmail mail storage.  It has no way to record attributes
(such as @samp{deleted}) or user-specified labels; it has no way to record
old headers and reformatted headers; it has no way to record cached
summary line information.

@item
It is very cumbersome to access an inbox file without danger of losing
mail, because it is necessary to interlock with mail delivery.
Moreover, different Unix systems use different interlocking
techniques.  The strategy of moving mail out of the inbox once and for
all into a separate Rmail file avoids the need for interlocking in all
the rest of Rmail, since only Rmail operates on the Rmail file.
@end enumerate

  When getting new mail, Rmail first copies the new mail from the inbox
file to the Rmail file and saves the Rmail file.  It then deletes the
inbox file.  This way a system crash may cause duplication of mail between
the inbox and the Rmail file, but it cannot lose mail.

  Copying mail from an inbox in the system's mailer directory actually puts
it in an intermediate file, @file{~/.newmail}.  This is because the
interlocking is done by a C program that copies to another file.
@file{~/.newmail} is deleted after mail merging is successful.  If there is
a crash at the wrong time, this file will continue to exist and will be
used as an inbox the next time you get new mail.

@node Rmail Files, Rmail Output, Rmail Inbox, Rmail
@section Multiple Mail Files

  Rmail operates by default on your @dfn{primary mail file}, which is
named @file{~/RMAIL} and which receives your incoming mail from your
system inbox file. You can also have other mail files and edit them with
Rmail.  These files can receive mail through their own inboxes, or you
can move messages into them by explicit command in Rmail (@pxref{Rmail
Output}).

@table @kbd
@item i @var{file} @key{RET}
Read @var{file} into Emacs and run Rmail on it (@code{rmail-input}).

@item M-x set-rmail-inbox-list @key{RET} @var{files} @key{RET}
Specify inbox file names for current Rmail file to get mail from.

@item g
Merge new mail from current Rmail file's inboxes
(@code{rmail-get-new-mail}).

@item C-u g @var{file}
Merge new mail from inbox file @var{file}.
@end table

@kindex i (Rmail)
@findex rmail-input
  To run Rmail on a file other than your primary mail file, you may use
the @kbd{i} (@code{rmail-input}) command in Rmail.  This visits the
file, puts it in Rmail mode, and then gets new mail from the file's
inboxes if any.  You can also use @kbd{M-x rmail-input} even when not in
Rmail.

  The file you read with @kbd{i} does not have to be in Rmail file format.
It could also be Unix mail format, mmdf format, or it could be a mixture
of all three, as long as each message has one of the three formats.
Rmail recognizes all three and converts all the messages to proper Rmail
format before showing you the file.

@findex set-rmail-inbox-list
  Each Rmail file can contain a list of inbox file names; you can specify
this list with @kbd{M-x set-rmail-inbox-list @key{RET} @var{files}
@key{RET}}.  The argument can contain any number of file names, separated
by commas.  It can also be empty, which specifies that this file should
have no inboxes.  Once a list of inboxes is specified, the Rmail file
remembers it permanently until it is explicitly changed.@refill

@kindex g (Rmail)
@findex rmail-get-new-mail
  If an Rmail file has inboxes, new mail is merged in from the inboxes
when you bring the Rmail file into Rmail, and when you use the @kbd{g}
(@code{rmail-get-new-mail}) command.  If the Rmail file
specifies no inboxes, then no new mail is merged in at these times.  A
special exception is made for your primary mail file: Rmail uses the
standard system inbox for it if it does not specify an inbox.

  To merge mail from a file that is not the usual inbox, give the
@kbd{g} key a numeric argument, as in @kbd{C-u g}.  Rmail prompts you
for a file name and merges mail from that file.  The inbox file is not
deleted or changed at all when you use @kbd{g} with an argument, so this
is a general way of merging one file of messages into another.

@node Rmail Output, Rmail Labels, Rmail Files, Rmail
@section Copying Messages Out to Files

@table @kbd
@item o @var{file} @key{RET}
Append a copy of the current message to the file @var{file},
writing it in Rmail file format (@code{rmail-output-to-rmail-file}).

@item C-o @var{file} @key{RET}
Append a copy of the current message to the file @var{file},
writing it in Unix mail file format (@code{rmail-output}).
@end table

@kindex o (Rmail)
@findex rmail-output-to-rmail-file
@kindex C-o (Rmail)
@findex rmail-output
  If an Rmail file has no inboxes, use explicit @kbd{o} commands to
write Rmail files.

  @kbd{o} (@code{rmail-output-to-rmail-file}) appends the current
message in Rmail format to the end of a specified file.  This is the
best command to use to move messages between Rmail files.  If you are
currently visiting the other Rmail file, copying is done into the other
file's Emacs buffer instead.  You should eventually save the buffer on
disk.

  The @kbd{C-o} (@code{rmail-output}) command in Rmail appends a copy of
the current message to a specified file, in Unix mail file format.  This
is useful for moving messages into files to be read by other mail
processors that do not understand Rmail format.

  Copying a message with @kbd{o} or @kbd{C-o} gives the original copy of the
message the @samp{filed} attribute. @samp{filed} appears in the mode
line when such a message is current.

  Normally you should use only @kbd{o} to output messages to other Rmail
files, never @kbd{C-o}.  But it is also safe if you always use
@kbd{C-o}, never @kbd{o}.  When a file is visited in Rmail, the last
message is checked, and if it is in Unix format, the entire file is
scanned and all Unix-format messages are converted to Rmail format.
(The reason for checking the last message is that scanning the file is
slow and most Rmail files have only Rmail format messages.)  If you use
@kbd{C-o} consistently, the last message is guaranteed to be in Unix
format, so Rmail will convert all messages properly.

When you and other users want to append mail to the same file, you
probably always want to use @kbd{C-o} instead of @kbd{o}.  Other mail
processors may not know Rmail format but will know Unix format.

  In any case, always use @kbd{o} to add to an Rmail file that is being
visited in Rmail.  Adding messages with @kbd{C-o} to the actual disk file
will trigger a ``simultaneous editing'' warning when you ask to save the
Emacs buffer, and the messages will be lost if you do save.

@node Rmail Labels, Rmail Summary, Rmail Output, Rmail
@section Labels
@cindex label (Rmail)
@cindex attribute (Rmail)

  Each message can have various @dfn{labels} assigned to it as a means of
classification.  A label has a name; different names mean different labels.
Any given label is either present or absent on a particular message.  A few
label names have standard meanings and are given to messages automatically
by Rmail when appropriate; these special labels are called @dfn{attributes}.
All other labels are assigned by the user.

@table @kbd
@item a @var{label} @key{RET}
Assign the label @var{label} to the current message (@code{rmail-add-label}).
@item k @var{label} @key{RET}
Remove the label @var{label} from the current message (@code{rmail-kill-label}).
@item C-M-n @var{labels} @key{RET}
Move to the next message that has one of the labels @var{labels}
(@code{rmail-next-labeled-message}).
@item C-M-p @var{labels} @key{RET}
Move to the previous message that has one of the labels @var{labels}
(@code{rmail-previous-labeled-message}).
@item C-M-l @var{labels} @key{RET}
Make a summary of all messages containing any of the labels @var{labels}
(@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}).
@end table

@noindent
Specifying an empty string for one these commands means to use the last
label specified for any of these commands.

@kindex a (Rmail)
@kindex k (rmail)
@findex rmail-add-label
@findex rmail-kill-label
  The @kbd{a} (@code{rmail-add-label}) and @kbd{k}
(@code{rmail-kill-label}) commands allow you to assign or remove any
label on the current message.  If the @var{label} argument is empty, it
means to assign or remove the label most recently assigned or
removed.

  Once you have given messages labels to classify them as you wish, there
are two ways to use the labels: in moving and in summaries.

@kindex C-M-n (Rmail)
@kindex C-M-p (Rmail)
@findex rmail-next-labeled-message
@findex rmail-previous-labeled-message
  The command @kbd{C-M-n @var{labels} @key{RET}}
(@code{rmail-next-labeled-message}) moves to the next message that has one
of the labels @var{labels}.  @var{labels} is one or more label names,
separated by commas.  @kbd{C-M-p} (@code{rmail-previous-labeled-message})
is similar, but moves backwards to previous messages.  A preceding numeric
argument to either one serves as a repeat count.@refill

@kindex C-M-l (Rmail)
@findex rmail-summary-by-labels
  The command @kbd{C-M-l @var{labels} @key{RET}}
(@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}) displays a summary containing only the
messages that have at least one of a specified set of messages.  The
argument @var{labels} is one or more label names, separated by commas.
@xref{Rmail Summary}, for information on summaries.@refill

  If the @var{labels} argument to @kbd{C-M-n}, @kbd{C-M-p} or
@kbd{C-M-l} is empty, it means to use the last set of labels specified
for any of these commands.

  Some labels such as @samp{deleted} and @samp{filed} have built-in
meanings and are assigned to or removed from messages automatically at
appropriate times; these labels are called @dfn{attributes}.  Here is a
list of Rmail attributes:

@table @samp
@item unseen
Means the message has never been current.  Assigned to messages when
they come from an inbox file, and removed when a message is made
current.
@item deleted
Means the message is deleted.  Assigned by deletion commands and
removed by undeletion commands (@pxref{Rmail Deletion}).
@item filed
Means the message has been copied to some other file.  Assigned by the
file output commands (@pxref{Rmail Files}).
@item answered
Means you have mailed an answer to the message.  Assigned by the @kbd{r}
command (@code{rmail-reply}).  @xref{Rmail Reply}.
@item forwarded
Means you have forwarded the message to other users.  Assigned by the
@kbd{f} command (@code{rmail-forward}).  @xref{Rmail Reply}.
@item edited
Means you have edited the text of the message within Rmail.
@xref{Rmail Editing}.
@end table

  All other labels are assigned or removed only by the user, and it is up
to the user to decide what they mean.

@node Rmail Summary, Rmail Reply, Rmail Labels, Rmail
@section Summaries
@cindex summary (Rmail)

  A @dfn{summary} is a buffer Rmail creates and displays to give you an
overview of the mail in an Rmail file.  It contains one line per message;
each line shows the message number, the sender, the labels, and the
subject.  When you select the summary buffer, you can use a number of
commands to select messages by moving in the summary buffer, or to
delete or undelete messages.

  A summary buffer applies to a single Rmail file only; if you are
editing multiple Rmail files, they have separate summary buffers.  The
summary buffer name is generated by appending @samp{-summary} to the
Rmail buffer's name.  Only one summary buffer is displayed at a
time unless you make several windows and select the summary buffers by
hand.

@menu
* Rmail Make Summary::  Making various sorts of summaries.
* Rmail Summary Edit::  Manipulating messages from the summary.
@end menu

@node Rmail Make Summary, Rmail Summary Edit, Rmail Summary, Rmail Summary
@subsection Making Summaries

  Here are the commands to create a summary for the current Rmail file.
Summaries do not update automatically; to make an updated summary, you
must use one of the commands again.

@table @kbd
@item h
@itemx C-M-h
Summarize all messages (@code{rmail-summary}).
@item l @var{labels} @key{RET}
@itemx C-M-l @var{labels} @key{RET}
Summarize message that have one or more of the specified labels
(@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}).
@item C-M-r @var{rcpts} @key{RET}
Summarize messages that have one or more of the specified recipients
(@code{rmail-summary-by-recipients}).
@end table

@kindex h (Rmail)
@findex rmail-summary
  The @kbd{h} or @kbd{C-M-h} (@code{rmail-summary}) command fills the
summary buffer for the current Rmail file with a summary of all the
messages in the file.  It then displays and selects the summary buffer
in another window.

@kindex l (Rmail)
@kindex C-M-l (Rmail)
@findex rmail-summary-by-labels
  The @kbd{l} or @kbd{C-M-l @var{labels} @key{RET}} 
(@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}) makes
a partial summary mentioning only the messages that have one or more of the
labels @var{labels}.  @var{labels} should contain label names separated by
commas.@refill

@kindex C-M-r (Rmail)
@findex rmail-summary-by-recipients
  @kbd{C-M-r @var{rcpts} @key{RET}} (@code{rmail-summary-by-recipients})
makes a partial summary mentioning only the messages that have one or more
of the recipients @var{rcpts}.  @var{rcpts} should contain mailing
addresses separated by commas.@refill

  Note that there is only one summary buffer for any Rmail file; making one
kind of summary discards any previously made summary.

@node Rmail Summary Edit,, Rmail Make Summary, Rmail Summary
@subsection Editing in Summaries

  Summary buffers are given the major mode Rmail Summary mode, which
provides the following special commands:

@table @kbd
@item j
Select the message described by the line that point is on
(@code{rmail-summary-goto-msg}).
@item C-n
Move to next line and select its message in Rmail
(@code{rmail-summary-next-all}).
@item C-p
Move to previous line and select its message
(@code{rmail-summary-@*previous-all}).
@item n
Move to next line, skipping lines saying `deleted', and select its
message (@code{rmail-summary-next-msg}).
@item p
Move to previous line, skipping lines saying `deleted', and select
its message (@code{rmail-summary-previous-msg}).
@item d
Delete the current line's message, then do like @kbd{n}
(@code{rmail-summary-delete-forward}).
@item u
Undelete and select this message or the previous deleted message in
the summary (@code{rmail-summary-undelete}).
@item @key{SPC}
Scroll the other window (presumably Rmail) forward
(@code{rmail-summary-scroll-msg-up}).
@item @key{DEL}
Scroll the other window backward (@code{rmail-summary-scroll-msg-down}).
@item x
Kill the summary window (@code{rmail-summary-exit}).
@item q
Exit Rmail (@code{rmail-summary-quit}).
@end table

@kindex C-n (Rmail summary)
@kindex C-p (Rmail summary)
@findex rmail-summary-next-all
@findex rmail-summary-previous-all
  The keys @kbd{C-n}(@code{rmail-summary-next-all}) and @kbd{C-p}
(@code{rmail-summary-previous-all}) are modified in Rmail Summary mode.
In addition to moving point in the summary buffer, they also cause the
line's message to become current in the associated Rmail buffer.  That
buffer is also made visible in another window if it is not currently
visible.

@kindex n (Rmail summary)
@kindex p (Rmail summary)
@findex rmail-summary-next-msg
@findex rmail-summary-previous-msg
  @kbd{n} and @kbd{p} are similar to @kbd{C-n} and @kbd{C-p}, but skip
lines that say `message deleted'.  They are like the @kbd{n} and @kbd{p}
keys of Rmail itself.  Note, however, that in a partial summary these
commands move only among the message listed in the summary.@refill

@kindex j (Rmail summary)
@findex rmail-summary-goto-msg
  The other Emacs cursor motion commands are not changed in Rmail
Summary mode, so it is easy to get the point on a line whose message is
not selected in Rmail.  This can also happen if you switch to the Rmail
window and switch messages there.  To get the Rmail buffer back in sync
with the summary, use the @kbd{j} (@code{rmail-summary-goto-msg})
command, which selects the message of the current summary line in Rmail.

@kindex d (Rmail summary)
@kindex u (Rmail summary)
@findex rmail-summary-delete-forward
@findex rmail-summary-undelete
  Deletion and undeletion can also be done from the summary buffer.
They always work based on where point is located in the summary buffer,
ignoring which message is selected in Rmail.  @kbd{d}
(@code{rmail-summary-delete-forward}) deletes the current line's
message, then moves to the next line whose message is not deleted and
selects that message.  The inverse is @kbd{u}
(@code{rmail-summary-undelete}), which moves back (if necessary) to a
line whose message is deleted, undeletes that message, and selects it in
Rmail.

@kindex SPC (Rmail summary)
@kindex DEL (Rmail summary)
@findex rmail-summary-scroll-msg-down
@findex rmail-summary-scroll-msg-up
  When moving through messages with the summary buffer, it is convenient
to be able to scroll the message while remaining in the summary window.
The commands @key{SPC} (@code{rmail-summary-scroll-msg-up}) and
@key{DEL} (@code{rmail-summary-scroll-msg-down}) do this.  They scroll
the message just as they do when the Rmail buffer is selected.@refill

@kindex x (Rmail summary)
@findex rmail-summary-exit
  When you are finished using the summary, type @kbd{x}
(@code{rmail-summary-exit}) to kill the summary buffer's window.

@kindex q (Rmail summary)
@findex rmail-summary-quit
  You can also exit Rmail while in the summary.  @kbd{q}
(@code{rmail-summary-quit}) kills the summary window, then saves the
Rmail file and switches to another buffer.

@node Rmail Reply, Rmail Editing, Rmail Summary, Rmail
@section Sending Replies

  Rmail has several commands that use Mail mode to send mail.
@xref{Sending Mail}, for information on using Mail mode.  Only the
special commands of Rmail for entering Mail mode are documented here.
Note that the usual keys for sending mail, @kbd{C-x m} and @kbd{C-x 4
m}, are available in Rmail mode and work just as they usually do.@refill

@table @kbd
@item m
Send a message (@code{rmail-mail}).
@item c
Continue editing already started outgoing message (@code{rmail-continue}).
@item r
Send a reply to the current Rmail message (@code{rmail-reply}).
@item f
Forward current message to other users (@code{rmail-forward}).
@end table

@kindex r (Rmail)
@findex rmail-reply
@vindex rmail-dont-reply-to
@cindex reply to a message
 To reply to a the message you are reading in Rmail, type @kbd{r}
(@code{rmail-reply}).  This displays the @samp{*mail*} buffer in another
window, much like @kbd{C-x 4 m}, but pre-initializes the @samp{Subject},
@samp{To}, @samp{CC}, and @samp{In-reply-to} header fields based on the
message you reply to.  The @samp{To} field is given the sender of
that message, and the @samp{CC} gets all the recipients of that message.
Recipients that match elements of the list
@code{rmail-dont-reply-to} are omitted; by default, this list contains
your own mailing address.@refill

  Once you have initialized the @samp{*mail*} buffer this way, sending the
mail goes as usual (@pxref{Sending Mail}).  You can edit the presupplied
header fields if they are not what you want.

@kindex C-c C-y (Mail mode)
@findex mail-yank-original
  One additional Mail mode command is available when you invoke mail
from Rmail: @kbd{C-c C-y} (@code{mail-yank-original}) inserts into the
outgoing message a copy of the current Rmail message.  Normally this is
the message you are replying to, but you can also switch to the Rmail
buffer, select a different message, switch back, and yank the new current
message.  Normally the yanked message is indented four spaces and has
most header fields deleted from it; an argument to @kbd{C-c C-y}
specifies the amount to indent.  @kbd{C-u C-c C-y} neither indents
the message nor deletes any header fields.@refill

@kindex f (Rmail)
@findex rmail-forward
@cindex forward a message
  Another frequent reason to send mail in Rmail is to forward the current
message to other users.  @kbd{f} (@code{rmail-forward}) makes this easy by
preinitializing the @samp{*mail*} buffer with the current message as the
text and a subject designating a forwarded message.  All you have to do is
fill in the recipients and send.@refill

@kindex m (Rmail)
@findex rmail-mail
  You can use the @kbd{m} (@code{rmail-mail}) command to start editing an
outgoing message that is not a reply.  It leaves the header fields empty.
Its only difference from @kbd{C-x 4 m} is that it makes the Rmail buffer
accessible for @kbd{C-c y}, just as @kbd{r} does.  Thus @kbd{m} can be
used to reply to or forward a message; it can do anything @kbd{r} or @kbd{f}
can do.@refill

@kindex c (Rmail)
@findex rmail-continue
  The @kbd{c} (@code{rmail-continue}) command resumes editing the
@samp{*mail*} buffer, to finish editing an outgoing message you were
already composing, or to alter a message you have sent.@refill

@node Rmail Editing, Rmail Digest, Rmail Reply, Rmail
@section Editing Within a Message

  Rmail mode provides a few special commands for moving within and
editing the current message.  In addition, the usual Emacs commands are
available (except for a few, such as @kbd{C-M-n} and @kbd{C-M-h}, that
are redefined by Rmail for other purposes).  However, the Rmail buffer
is normally read-only, and to alter it you must use the Rmail command
@kbd{w} described below.

@table @kbd
@item t
Toggle display of original headers (@code{rmail-toggle-headers}).
@item w
Edit current message (@code{rmail-edit-current-message}).
@end table

@kindex t (Rmail)
@findex rmail-toggle-header
@vindex rmail-ignored-headers
  Rmail reformats the header of each message before displaying it.
Normally this involves deleting most header fields, on the grounds that
they are not interesting.  The variable @code{rmail-ignored-headers}
should contain a regexp that matches the header fields to discard in
this way.  The original headers are saved permanently; to see what they
look like, use the @kbd{t} (@code{rmail-toggle-headers}) command.  This
discards the reformatted headers of the current message and displays it
with the original headers.  Repeating @kbd{t} reformats the message
again.  Selecting the message again also reformats.

@kindex w (Rmail)
@findex rmail-edit-current-message
  The Rmail buffer is normally read-only, and most of the characters you
would type to modify it (including most letters) are redefined as Rmail
commands.  This is usually not a problem since people rarely want to
change the text of a message.  When you do want to do this, type @kbd{w}
(@code{rmail-edit-current-message}), which changes from Rmail mode to
Rmail Edit mode, another major mode which is nearly the same as Text
mode.  The mode line indicates this change.

  In Rmail Edit mode, letters insert themselves as usual and the Rmail
commands are not available.  When you are finished editing the message
and are ready to go back to Rmail, type @kbd{C-c C-c}, which switches
back to Rmail mode.  To return to Rmail mode but cancel all the editing
you have done, type @kbd{C-c C-]}.

@vindex rmail-edit-mode-hook
  Entering Rmail Edit mode calls the value of the variable
@code{text-mode-hook} with no arguments, if that value exists and is not
@code{nil}.  It then does the same with the variable
@code{rmail-edit-mode-hook} and finally adds the attribute @samp{edited}
to the message.

@node Rmail Digest,, Rmail Editing, Rmail
@section Digest Messages
@cindex digest message
@cindex undigestify

  A @dfn{digest message} is a message which exists to contain and carry
several other messages.  Digests are used on moderated mailing lists.  All
messages that arrive for the list during a period of time, such as one
day, are put inside a single digest which is then sent to the subscribers.
Transmitting the single digest uses much less computer time than
transmitting the individual messages even though the total size is the
same, because the per-message overhead in network mail transmission is
considerable.

@findex undigestify-rmail-message
  When you receive a digest message, the most convenient way to read it is
to @dfn{undigestify} it: to turn it back into many individual messages.
You can then read and delete the individual messages as it suits you.

  To undigestify a message, select it and then type @kbd{M-x
undigestify-rmail-message}.  This copies each submessage as a separate
Rmail message and inserts them all following the digest.  The digest
message itself is flagged as deleted.
