@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Free Software Foundation, Inc. 
@c See the file lispref.texinfo for copying conditions.
@setfilename ../../info/display.info
@node Display, Extents, Abbrevs, Top
@chapter Emacs Display

  This chapter describes a number of features related to the display
that Emacs presents to the user.

@menu
* Refresh Screen::      Clearing the screen and redrawing everything on it.
* Truncation::          Folding or wrapping long text lines.
* The Echo Area::       Where messages are displayed.
* Selective Display::   Hiding part of the buffer text.
* Overlay Arrow::       Display of an arrow to indicate position.
* Temporary Displays::  Displays that go away automatically.
* Faces::		A face defines a graphics appearance: font, color, etc.
* Window System Objects::
                        Working with objects such as fonts and bitmaps.
* Blinking::            How Emacs shows the matching open parenthesis.
* Inverse Video::	Specifying how the screen looks.
* Usual Display::	The usual conventions for displaying nonprinting chars.
* Display Tables::	How to specify other conventions.
* Beeping::             Audible signal to the user.
* Window Systems::      Which window system is being used.
@end menu

@node Refresh Screen
@section Refreshing the Screen

The function @code{redraw-screen} redisplays the entire contents of a
given screen.  @xref{Screens}.

@c Emacs 19 feature
@defun redraw-screen screen
This function clears and redisplays screen @var{screen}.
@end defun

Even more powerful is @code{redraw-display}.

@deffn Command redraw-display
This function clears and redisplays all visible screens.
@end deffn

  Normally, suspending and resuming Emacs also refreshes the screen.
Some terminal emulators record separate contents for display-oriented
programs such as Emacs and for ordinary sequential display.  If you are
using such a terminal, you might want to inhibit the redisplay on
resumption.  @xref{Suspending Emacs}.

@defvar no-redraw-on-reenter
@cindex suspend (cf. @code{no-redraw-on-reenter})
@cindex resume (cf. @code{no-redraw-on-reenter})
This variable controls whether Emacs redraws the entire screen after it
has been suspended and resumed.  Non-@code{nil} means yes, @code{nil}
means no.
@end defvar

@cindex display update
@cindex update display
@cindex refresh display
  The above functions do not actually cause the display to be updated;
rather, they clear out the internal display records that Emacs
maintains, so that the next time the display is updated it will be
redrawn from scratch.  Normally this occurs the next time that
@code{next-event} or @code{sit-for} is called; however, a display
update will not occur if there is input pending.  @xref{Input Events}.

@deffn Command force-redisplay
@cindex force redisplay
  This function causes an immediate update of the display in all
circumstances, whether or not input is pending.
@end deffn

@ignore  @c Documented in screens.texinfo
@node Screen Size
@section Screen Size
@cindex size of screen
@cindex screen size
@cindex display lines
@cindex display columns
@cindex resize redisplay

  The screen size functions report or tell Emacs the height or width of
the terminal.  When you are using multiple screens, they apply to the
selected screen (@pxref{Screens}).

@defun screen-height
  This function returns the number of lines on the screen that are
available for display.

@example
@group
(screen-height)
     @result{} 50
@end group
@end example
@end defun

@defun screen-width
  This function returns the number of columns on the screen that are
available for display.

@example
@group
(screen-width)
     @result{} 80
@end group
@end example
@end defun

@defun set-screen-height lines &optional not-actual-size
  This function declares that the terminal can display @var{lines} lines.
The sizes of existing windows are altered proportionally to fit.

  If @var{not-actual-size} is non-@code{nil}, then Emacs displays
@var{lines} lines of output, but does not change its value for the
actual height of the screen.  (Knowing the correct actual size may be
necessary for correct cursor positioning.)  Using a smaller height than
the terminal actually implements may be useful to reproduce behavior
observed on a smaller screen, or if the terminal malfunctions when using
its whole screen.

  If @var{lines} is different from what it was previously, then the
entire screen is cleared and redisplayed using the new size.

  This function returns @code{nil}.
@end defun

@defun set-screen-width columns &optional not-actual-size
  This function declares that the terminal can display @var{columns}
columns.  The details are as in @code{set-screen-height}.
@end defun
@end ignore

@node Truncation
@section Truncation
@cindex line wrapping
@cindex continuation lines
@cindex @samp{$} in display
@cindex @samp{\} in display

  When a line of text extends beyond the right edge of a window, the
line can either be truncated or continued on the next line.  When a line
is truncated, this is shown with a @samp{\} in the rightmost column of
the window.  When a line is continued or ``wrapped'' onto the next line,
this is shown with a curved arrow in the rightmost column of the window.
The additional screen lines used to display a long text line are called
@dfn{continuation} lines.  (Note that wrapped lines are not filled;
filling has nothing to do with continuation and truncation.
@xref{Filling}.)

@defopt truncate-lines
   This buffer-local variable controls how Emacs displays lines that
extend beyond the right edge of the window.  If it is non-@code{nil},
then Emacs does not display continuation lines; rather each line of
text occupies exactly one screen line, and a backslash appears at the
edge of any line that extends to or beyond the edge of the window.  The
default is @code{nil}.

  If the variable @code{truncate-partial-width-windows} is
non-@code{nil}, then truncation is used for windows that are not the
full width of the screen, regardless of the value of
@code{truncate-lines}.
@end defopt

@defvar default-truncate-lines
  This variable is the default value for @code{truncate-lines} in buffers
that do not have local values for it.
@end defvar

@defopt truncate-partial-width-windows
  This variable determines how lines that are too wide to fit on the
screen are displayed in side-by-side windows (@pxref{Splitting
Windows}).  If it is non-@code{nil}, then wide lines are truncated (with
a @samp{\} at the end of the line); otherwise they wrap to the next
screen line (with a curved arrow at the end of the line).
@end defopt

  You can override the images that indicate continuation or truncation
with the display table; see @ref{Display Tables}.

@node The Echo Area
@section The Echo Area
@cindex error display
@cindex echo area

  The @dfn{echo area} is used for displaying messages made with the
@code{message} primitive, and for echoing keystrokes.  It is not the
same as the minibuffer, despite the fact that the minibuffer appears
(when active) in the same place on the screen as the echo area.  The
@cite{GNU Emacs Manual} specifies the rules for resolving conflicts
between the echo area and the minibuffer for use of that screen space
(@pxref{Minibuffer,, The Minibuffer, emacs, The GNU Emacs Manual}).
Error messages appear in the echo area; see @ref{Errors}.

You can write output in the echo area by using the Lisp printing
functions with @code{t} as the stream (@pxref{Output Functions}), or as
follows:

@defun message string &rest arguments
  This function prints a one-line message in the echo area.  The
argument @var{string} is similar to a C language @code{printf} control
string.  See @code{format} in @ref{String Conversion}, for the details
on the conversion specifications.  @code{message} returns the
constructed string.

@c Emacs 19 feature
If @var{string} is @code{nil}, @code{message} clears the echo area.  If
the minibuffer is active, this brings the minibuffer contents back onto
the screen immediately.
@example
@group
(message
 "Minibuffer depth is %d."
 (minibuffer-depth))
@result{} "Minibuffer depth is 0."
@end group

@group
---------- Echo Area ----------
Minibuffer depth is 0.
---------- Echo Area ----------
@end group
@end example
@end defun

@defvar cursor-in-echo-area
  This variable controls where the cursor appears when a message is
displayed in the echo area.  If it is non-@code{nil}, then the cursor
appears at the end of the message.  Otherwise, the cursor appears at
point---not in the echo area at all.

  The value is normally @code{nil}; Lisp programs bind it to @code{t}
for brief periods of time.
@end defvar

@node Selective Display
@section Selective Display
@cindex selective display

  @dfn{Selective display} is a class of minor modes in which specially
marked lines do not appear on the screen, or in which highly indented
lines do not appear.

  The first variant, explicit selective display, is designed for use in
a Lisp program.  The program controls which lines are hidden by altering
the text.  Outline mode uses this variant.  In the second variant, the
choice of lines to hide is made automatically based on indentation.
This variant is designed as a user-level feature.

  The way you control explicit selective display is by replacing a
newline (control-j) with a control-m.  The text which was formerly a
line following that newline is now invisible.  Strictly speaking, it is
temporarily no longer a line at all, since only newlines can separate
lines; it is now part of the previous line.

  Selective display does not directly affect editing commands.  For
example, @kbd{C-f} (@code{forward-char}) moves point unhesitatingly into
invisible space.  However, the replacement of newline characters with
carriage return characters affects some editing commands.  For example,
@code{next-line} skips invisible lines, since it searches only for
newlines.  Modes that use selective display can also define commands
that take account of the newlines, or which make parts of the text
visible or invisible.

  When you write a selectively displayed buffer into a file, all the
control-m's are replaced by their original newlines.  This means that
when you next read in the file, it looks OK, with nothing invisible.
The selective display effect is seen only within Emacs.

@defvar selective-display
  This buffer-local variable enables selective display.  This means that
lines, or portions of lines, may be made invisible.  

@itemize @bullet
@item
If the value of @code{selective-display} is @code{t}, then any portion
of a line that follows a control-m is not displayed.

@item
If the value of @code{selective-display} is a positive integer, then
lines that start with more than @code{selective-display} columns of
indentation are not displayed.
@end itemize

  When some portion of a buffer is invisible, the vertical movement
commands operate as if that portion did not exist, allowing a single
@code{next-line} command to skip any number of invisible lines.
However, character movement commands (such as @code{forward-char}) do
not skip the invisible portion, and it is possible (if tricky) to insert
or delete text in an invisible portion.

  In the examples below, what is shown is the @emph{display} of the buffer
@code{foo}, which changes with the value of @code{selective-display}.  The
@emph{contents} of the buffer do not change.

@example
@group
(setq selective-display nil)
     @result{} nil

---------- Buffer: foo ----------
1 on this column
 2on this column
  3n this column
  3n this column
 2on this column
1 on this column
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
@end group

@group
(setq selective-display 2)
     @result{} 2

---------- Buffer: foo ----------
1 on this column
 2on this column
 2on this column
1 on this column
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
@end group
@end example
@end defvar

@defvar selective-display-ellipses
If this buffer-local variable is non-@code{nil}, then Emacs displays
@samp{@dots{}} at the end of a line that is followed by invisible text.
This example is a continuation of the previous one.

@example
@group
(setq selective-display-ellipses t)
     @result{} t

---------- Buffer: foo ----------
1 on this column
 2on this column ...
 2on this column
1 on this column
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
@end group
@end example

You can use a display table to substitute other text for the ellipsis
(@samp{@dots{}}).  @xref{Display Tables}.
@end defvar

@node Overlay Arrow
@section Overlay Arrow
@cindex overlay arrow

  The @dfn{overlay arrow} is useful for directing the user's attention
to a particular line in a buffer.  For example, in the modes used for
interface to debuggers, the overlay arrow indicates the line of code
about to be executed.

@defvar overlay-arrow-string
This variable holds the string to display as an arrow, or @code{nil} if
the arrow feature is not in use.
@end defvar

@defvar overlay-arrow-position
This variable holds a marker which indicates where to display the arrow.
It should point at the beginning of a line.  The arrow text is
displayed at the beginning of that line, overlaying any text that would
otherwise appear.  Since the arrow is usually short, and the line
usually begins with indentation, normally nothing significant is
overwritten.

The overlay string is displayed only in the buffer which this marker
points into.  Thus, only one buffer can have an overlay arrow at any
given time.
@c !!! overlay-arrow-position: but the overlay string may remain in the display
@c of some other buffer until an update is required.  This should be fixed
@c now.  Is it?
@end defvar

@node Temporary Displays
@section Temporary Displays

  Temporary displays are used by commands to put output into a buffer
and then present it to the user for perusal rather than for editing.
Many of the help commands use this feature.

@defspec with-output-to-temp-buffer buffer-name forms@dots{}
  This function executes @var{forms} while arranging to insert any
output they print into the buffer named @var{buffer-name}.  The buffer
is then shown in some window for viewing, displayed but not selected.

  The string @var{buffer-name} specifies the temporary buffer, which
need not already exist.  The argument must be a string, not a buffer.
The buffer is erased initially (with no questions asked), and it is
marked as unmodified after @code{with-output-to-temp-buffer} exits.

  @code{with-output-to-temp-buffer} binds @code{standard-output} to the
temporary buffer, then it evaluates the forms in @var{forms}.  Output
using the Lisp output functions within @var{forms} goes by default to
that buffer (but screen display and messages in the echo area, although
output in the general sense of the word, are not affected).
@xref{Output Functions}.

  The value of the last form in @var{forms} is returned.

@example
@group
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
 This is the contents of foo.
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
@end group

@group
(with-output-to-temp-buffer "foo"
    (print 20)
    (print standard-output))
@result{} #<buffer foo>

---------- Buffer: foo ----------
20

#<buffer foo>

---------- Buffer: foo ----------
@end group
@end example
@end defspec

@defvar temp-buffer-show-function
  The value of this variable, if non-@code{nil}, is called as a function
to display a help buffer.  This variable is used by
@code{with-output-to-temp-buffer}.

In Emacs versions 18 and earlier, this variable was called
@code{temp-buffer-show-hook}.
@end defvar

@defun momentary-string-display string position &optional char message
  This function momentarily displays @var{string} in the current
buffer at @var{position} (which is a character offset from the
beginning of the buffer).  The display remains until the next
character is typed.

  If the next character the user types is @var{char}, Emacs ignores it.
Otherwise, that character remains buffered for subsequent use as input.
Thus, typing @var{char} will simply remove the string from the display,
while typing (say) @kbd{C-f} will remove the string from the display and
later (presumably) move point forward.  The argument @var{char} is a
space by default.

  The return value of @code{momentary-string-display} is not meaningful.

  If @var{message} is non-@code{nil}, it is displayed in the echo area
while @var{string} is displayed in the buffer.  If it is @code{nil},
then instructions to type @var{char} are displayed there, e.g.,
@samp{Type RET to continue editing}.

  In this example, point is initially located at the beginning of the
second line:

@example
@group
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
This is the contents of foo.
@point{}Second line.
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
@end group

@group
(momentary-string-display
   "**** Important Message! ****" (point) ?\r
   "Type RET when done reading")
@result{} t
@end group

@group
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
This is the contents of foo.
**** Important Message! ****Second line.
---------- Buffer: foo ----------

---------- Echo Area ----------
Type RET when done reading
---------- Echo Area ----------
@end group
@end example

  This function works by actually changing the text in the buffer.  As a
result, if you later undo in this buffer, you will see the message come
and go.
@end defun

@ignore  @c Lucid Emacs has extents instead.

@node Overlays
@section Overlays
@cindex overlays

You can use @dfn{overlays} to alter the appearance of a buffer's text on
the screen.  An overlay is an object which belongs to a particular
buffer, and has a specified beginning and end.  It also has properties
which you can examine and set; these affect the display of the text
within the overlay.

@menu
* Overlay Properties::	How to read and set properties.
			What properties do to the screen display.
* Managing Overlays::   Creating, moving, finding overlays.
@end menu

@node Overlay Properties
@subsection Overlay Properties

Overlay properties are like text properties in some respects, but the
differences are more important than the similarities.  Text properties
are considered a part of the text; overlays are specifically considered
not to be part of the text.  Thus, copying text between various buffers
and strings preserves text properties, but does not try to preserve
overlays.  Changing a buffer's text properties marks the buffer as
modified, while moving an overlay or changing its properties does not.

@table @code
@item face
@kindex face
This property controls the font and color of text.  @xref{Faces}, for
more information.  This feature is temporary; in the future, we may
replace it with other ways of specifying how to display text.

@item mouse-face
@kindex mouse-face
This property is used instead of @code{face} when the mouse is within
the range of the overlay.  This feature is not yet implemented, and may
be temporary.  It is documented here because we are likely to implement it
this way at least for a while.

@item priority
@kindex priority
This property's value (which should be a nonnegative number) determines
the priority of the overlay.  The priority matters when two or more
overlays cover the same character and both specify a face for display;
the one whose @code{priority} value is larger takes priority over the
other, and its face attributes override the face attributes of the lower
priority overlay.

Currently, all overlays take priority over text properties.  Please
avoid using negative priority values, as we have not yet decided just
what they should mean.

@item window
@kindex window
If the @code{window} property is non-@code{nil}, then the overlay
applies only on that window.

@item before-string
@kindex before-string
This property's value is a string to add to the display at the beginning
of the overlay.  The string does not appear in the buffer in any
sense---only on the screen.  This is not yet implemented, but will be.

@item after-string
@kindex after-string
This property's value is a string to add to the display at the end of
the overlay.  The string does not appear in the buffer in any
sense---only on the screen.  This is not yet implemented, but will be.

@item modification-hooks
@kindex modification-hooks
This property's value is a list of functions to be called if any
character within the overlay is changed or if text is inserted strictly
within the overlay.  Each function receives two arguments: the beginning
and end of the part of the buffer being modified.

@item insert-in-front-hooks
@kindex insert-in-front-hooks
This property's value is a list of functions to be called
if text is inserted right at the beginning of the overlay.

@item insert-behind-hooks
@kindex insert-behind-hooks
This property's value is a list of functions to be called if text is
inserted right at the end of the overlay.
@end table

  These are the functions for reading and writing the properties of an
overlay.

@defun overlay-get overlay prop
This function returns the value of property @var{prop} recorded in
@var{overlay}.  If @var{overlay} does not record any value for that
property, then the value is @code{nil}.
@end defun

@defun overlay-put overlay prop value
This function sets the value of property @var{prop} recorded in
@var{overlay} to @var{value}.  It returns @var{value}.
@end defun

@node Managing Overlays
@subsection Managing Overlays

@defun make-overlay start end &optional buffer
This function creates and returns an overlay which belongs to
@var{buffer} and ranges from @var{start} to @var{end}.  Both @var{start}
and @var{end} must specify buffer positions; they may be integers or
markers.  If @var{buffer} is omitted, the overlay is created in the
current buffer.

The return value is the overlay itself.
@end defun

@defun overlay-start overlay
This function returns the position at which @var{overlay} starts.
@end defun

@defun overlay-end overlay
This function returns the position at which @var{overlay} ends.
@end defun

@defun overlay-buffer overlay
This function returns the buffer that @var{overlay} belongs to.
@end defun

@defun delete-overlay overlay
This function deletes @var{overlay}.  The overlay continues to exist as
a Lisp object, but ceases to be part of the buffer it belonged to, and
ceases to have any effect on display.
@end defun

@defun move-overlay overlay start end &optional buffer
This function moves @var{overlay} to @var{buffer}, and places its bounds
at @var{start} and @var{end}.  Both arguments @var{start} and @var{end}
must specify buffer positions; they may be integers or markers.  If
@var{buffer} is omitted, the overlay stays in the same buffer.

The return value is
@var{overlay}.

This is the only valid way to change the endpoints of an overlay.  Do
not try modifying the markers in the overlay by hand, as that fails to
update other vital data structures and can cause some overlays to be
``lost''.
@end defun

@defun overlays-at pos
This function returns a list of all the overlays that contain position
@var{pos} in the current buffer.  The list is in no particular order.
An overlay contains position @var{pos} if it begins at or before
@var{pos}, and ends after @var{pos}.
@end defun

@defun next-overlay-change pos
This function returns the buffer position of the next beginning or end
of an overlay, after @var{pos}.
@end defun

@end ignore

@node Faces
@section Faces
@cindex face

A @dfn{face} is a named collection of graphical attributes: font,
foreground color, background color, background pixmap, and optional
underlining.  Faces control the display of text on the screen.
Every face has a name, which is a symbol such as @code{default} or
@code{modeline}.

@ignore  @c Does not apply any more in Lucid Emacs.
@cindex face id
Each face has its own @dfn{face id number} which distinguishes faces at
low levels within Emacs.  However, for most purposes, you can refer to
faces in Lisp programs by their names.
@end ignore

Each face name is meaningful for all screens, and by default it has the
same meaning in all screens.  But you can arrange to give a particular
face name a special meaning in one screen if you wish. (This is
implemented by having, for each face name, a separate face object of
that name associated with each screen.) Each face also has a global,
non-screen version whose attributes you can set; this version determines
the default attributes that the face will have on new screens.

The face named @code{default} is used for ordinary text.  The face named
@code{modeline} is used for displaying the mode line.  The face named
@code{highlight} is used for highlighted extents (@pxref{Extents}).  The
faces named @code{left-margin} and @code{right-margin} are used for the
left and right margin areas, respectively (@pxref{Annotations}).

@menu
* Merging Faces::	How Emacs decides which face to use for a character.
* Face Functions::	How to define and examine faces.
@end menu

@node Merging Faces
@subsection Merging Faces for Display

  Here are all the ways to specify which face to use for display of text:

@itemize @bullet
@item
With defaults.  Each screen has a @dfn{default face}, which is used for
all text that doesn't somehow specify another face.  The face named
@code{default} applies to the text area, while the faces
@code{left-margin} and @code{right-margin} apply to the left and right
margin areas.

@item
With text properties.  A character may have a @code{face} property; if so,
it's displayed with that face. (Text properties are actually implemented
in terms of extents.) @xref{Text Properties}.
@ignore  @c Not in Lucid Emacs
If the character has a @code{mouse-face}
property, that is used instead of the @code{face} property when the mouse
is ``near enough'' to the character.  @xref{Special Properties}.
@end ignore

@item
With extents.  An extent may have a @code{face} property, which applies
to all the text covered by the extent; in addition, if the
@code{highlight} property is set, the @code{highlight} property applies
when the mouse moves over the extent or if the extent is explicitly
highlighted.  @xref{Extents}.

@item
With annotations.  Annotations that are inserted into a buffer can specify
their own face. (Annotations are actually implemented in terms of extents.)
@xref{Annotations}.
@end itemize

  If these various sources together specify more than one face for a
particular character, Emacs merges the attributes of the various faces
specified.  Extents, text properties, and annotations all use the same
underlying representation (as extents).  When multiple extents cover one
character, an extent with higher priority overrides those with lower
priority.  @xref{Extents}.  If no extent covers a particular character,
the default face for the screen is used.
@ignore
@c In Lucid Emacs, the screen's own font/color is hard-linked to the
@c default face for the screen
  If an attribute such as the font or a color is not specified in any of
the above ways, the screen's own font or color is used.
@end ignore

@cindex background pixmap
  If a background pixmap is specified, it determines what will be
displayed in the background of text characters.  If background pixmap
is actually a pixmap, with its colors specified, those colors are
used; if it is a bitmap, the face's foreground and background colors
are used to color it.

@node Face Functions
@subsection Functions for Working with Faces

  The attributes a face can specify include the font, the foreground
color, the background color, the background pixmap, and underlining.
The face can also leave these unspecified by giving the value @code{nil}
for them.  (However, you cannot set the font, foreground color, or
background color of the built-in faces @code{default}, @code{modeline},
@code{left-margin}, or @code{right-margin} to @code{nil}).

  Here are the primitives for creating and changing faces.

@defun make-face name
This function defines a new face named @var{name} on all screens,
initially with all attributes @code{nil}.  It does nothing if there is
already a face named @var{name}.
@end defun

@defun list-faces
This function returns a list of all defined face names. (This function
is known as @code{face-list} in FSF Emacs.)
@end defun

@defun facep object
This function returns whether the given object is a face.
@end defun

@defun face-screen face
This function returns the screen of the given face, or @code{t} if this
is a global, non-screen face.
@end defun

In the following functions, if you specify @var{screen}, they affect
just that screen; otherwise, they affect all screens as well as the
defaults that apply to new screens (i.e. the global, non-screen faces).
If you specify @var{screen} as @code{t}, they affect only the global,
non-screen faces.

@defun copy-face old-face new-name &optional screen
This function defines a new face named @var{new-name} which is a copy of
the existing face named @var{old-face}.  If there is already a face
named @var{new-name}, then it alters the face to have the same
attributes as @var{old-face}.
@end defun

  You can modify the attributes of an existing face with the following
functions. 

@defun set-face-foreground face color &optional screen
@defunx set-face-background face color &optional screen
These functions set the foreground (respectively, background) color of
face @var{face} to @var{color}.  The argument @var{color} should be a
string (the name of a color) or a pixel object as returned by
@code{make-pixel} (@pxref{Pixels}).
@end defun

@defun set-face-background-pixmap face pixmap &optional screen
This function sets the background pixmap of face @var{face} to
@var{pixmap}.  The argument @var{pixmap} should be a string (the name of
a bitmap or pixmap file; the directories listed in the variable
@code{x-bitmap-file-path} will be searched) or a pixmap object as
returned by @code{make-pixmap} (@pxref{Pixmaps}).  The argument may also
be a list of the form @code{(@var{width} @var{height} @var{data})} where
@var{width} and @var{height} are the size in pixels, and @var{data} is a
string, containing the raw bits of the bitmap.
@end defun

@defun set-face-font face font &optional screen
This function sets the font of face @var{face}.  The argument @var{font}
should be a string or a font object as returned by @code{make-font}
(@pxref{Fonts}).
@end defun

@defun set-face-underline-p face underline-p &optional screen
This function sets the underline attribute of face @var{face}.
@end defun

@defun invert-face face &optional screen
Swap the foreground and background colors of face @var{face}.  If the
face doesn't specify both foreground and background, then its foreground
and background are set to the default background and foreground.
@end defun

  These functions examine the attributes of a face.  If you don't
specify @var{screen}, they refer to the default data for new screens.

@defun face-foreground face &optional screen
@defunx face-background face &optional screen
These functions return the foreground (respectively, background) color
of face @var{face}.  The argument returned is a pixel object.
@xref{Pixels}.
@end defun

@defun face-background-pixmap face &optional screen
This function return the background pixmap of face @var{face}.  The
argument returned is a pixmap object.  @xref{Pixmaps}.
@end defun

@defun face-font face &optional screen
This function returns the font of face @var{face}.  The argument
returned is a font object. (Note: This is not the same as the function
@code{face-font} in FSF Emacs.) @xref{Fonts}.
@end defun

@defun face-font-name face &optional screen
This function returns the name of the font of face @var{face}, or
@code{nil} if it is unspecified.  This is basically equivalent to
@code{(font-name (face-font @var{face} @var{screen}))} except that
it does not cause an error if @var{face}'s font is @code{nil}. (This
function is named @code{face-font} in FSF Emacs.)
@end defun

@defun face-underline-p face &optional screen
This function returns the underline attribute of face @var{face}.
@end defun

@ignore  @c Not any more in Lucid Emacs.
@defun face-id-number face
This function returns the id number of face @var{face}.
@end defun
@end ignore

@defun face-equal face1 face2 &optional screen
This returns @code{t} if the faces @var{face1} and @var{face2} have the
same attributes for display.
@end defun

@defun face-differs-from-default-p face &optional screen
This returns @code{t} if the face @var{face} displays differently from
the default face.  A face is considered to be ``the same'' as the normal
face if each attribute is either the same as that of the default face or
@code{nil} (meaning to inherit from the default).
@end defun

@ignore  @c Not in Lucid Emacs.
@defvar region-face
This variable's value specifies the face id to use to display characters
in the region when it is active (in Transient Mark mode only).  The face
thus specified takes precedence over all faces that come from text
properties and overlays, for characters in the region.  @xref{The Mark},
for more information about Transient Mark mode.

Normally, the value is the id number of the face named @code{region}.
@end defvar
@end ignore

@node Window System Objects
@section Window System Objects
@cindex window system objects

@menu
* Fonts::
* Pixels::
* Pixmaps::
@end menu

@node Fonts
@subsection Fonts
@cindex font

  This section describes how to create and work with font objects, which
encapsulate fonts in the window system.  A font object can be used as
the argument to functions such as @code{set-face-font} (@pxref{Faces}).

@defun fontp object
This predicate returns @code{t} if @var{object} is a font, and
@code{nil} otherwise.
@end defun

@defun set-default-font font
@end defun

@defvar x-inhibit-font-complaints
@end defvar

@menu
* Creating Font Objects::
* Font Names::
* Font Size::
* Font Characteristics::
@end menu

@node Creating Font Objects
@subsubsection Creating Font Objects

@defun make-font name &optional screen
@end defun

@defun try-font name &optional screen
@end defun

@node Font Names
@subsubsection Font Names
@cindex font name
@cindex available fonts
@cindex fonts available

@defun x-list-fonts pattern &optional screen
@end defun

@defun font-name font
@end defun

@defun font-truename font
@end defun

@node Font Size
@subsubsection Font Size
@cindex font size

@defun x-font-size font
@end defun

@defun x-find-larger-font font &optional screen
@end defun

@defun x-find-smaller-font font &optional screen
@end defun

@node Font Characteristics
@subsubsection Font Characteristics
@cindex font characteristics
@cindex characteristics of fonts
@cindex bold
@cindex demibold
@cindex italic
@cindex oblique

@defun x-font-properties font
@end defun

@defun x-make-font-bold font &optional screen
@end defun

@defun x-make-font-demibold font &optional screen
@end defun

@defun x-make-font-unbold font &optional screen
@end defun

@defun x-make-font-italic font &optional screen
@end defun

@defun x-make-font-oblique font &optional screen
@end defun

@defun x-make-font-unitalic font &optional screen
@end defun

@node Pixels
@subsection Pixels
@cindex pixel

@defun pixelp object
@end defun

@defun make-pixel name &optional screen
@end defun

@defun pixel-name pixel
@end defun

@node Pixmaps
@subsection Pixmaps
@cindex pixmap

@defun pixmapp object
@end defun

@defun make-pixmap name &optional screen
@end defun

@defvar x-bitmap-file-path
@end defvar

@defun colorize-pixmap
@end defun

@defun pixmap-contributes-to-line-height-p
@end defun

@defun pixmap-depth
@end defun

@defun pixmap-file-name
@end defun

@defun pixmap-height
@end defun

@defun pixmap-hotspot-x
@end defun

@defun pixmap-width
@end defun

@defun set-pixmap-contributes-to-line-height
@end defun

@defun set-pixmap-data
@end defun

@defun set-pixmap-hotspot
@end defun

@defun set-pixmap-mask
@end defun

@node Blinking
@section Blinking
@cindex parenthesis matching
@cindex blinking
@cindex balancing parentheses
@cindex close parenthesis

  This section describes the mechanism by which Emacs shows a matching
open parenthesis when the user inserts a close parenthesis.

@vindex blink-paren-hook
@defvar blink-paren-function
  The value of this variable should be a function (of no arguments) to
be called whenever a char with close parenthesis syntax is inserted.
The value of @code{blink-paren-function} may be @code{nil}, in which
case nothing is done.

@quotation
@strong{Please note:} this variable was named @code{blink-paren-hook} in
older Emacs versions, but since it is not called with the standard
convention for hooks, it was renamed to @code{blink-paren-function} in
version 19.
@end quotation
@end defvar

@defvar blink-matching-paren
If this variable is @code{nil}, then @code{blink-matching-open} does
nothing.
@end defvar

@defvar blink-matching-paren-distance
This variable specifies the maximum distance to scan for a matching
parenthesis before giving up.
@end defvar

@defun blink-matching-open
This function is the default value of @code{blink-paren-function}.  It
assumes that point follows a character with close parenthesis syntax and
moves the cursor momentarily to the matching opening character.  If that
character is not already on the screen, then its context is shown by
displaying it in the echo area.  To avoid long delays, this function
does not search farther than @code{blink-matching-paren-distance}
characters.

Here is an example of calling this function explicitly.

@smallexample
@group
(defun interactive-blink-matching-open ()
@c Do not break this line! -- rms.
@c The first line of a doc string
@c must stand alone.
  "Indicate momentarily the start of sexp before point."
  (interactive)
@end group
@group
  (let ((blink-matching-paren-distance
         (buffer-size))
        (blink-matching-paren t))
    (blink-matching-open)))
@end group
@end smallexample
@end defun

@node Inverse Video
@section Inverse Video
@cindex Inverse Video

@defopt inverse-video
@cindex highlighting
This variable controls whether Emacs uses inverse video for all text
on the screen.  Non-@code{nil} means yes, @code{nil} means no.  The
default is @code{nil}.
@end defopt

@defopt mode-line-inverse-video
This variable controls the use of inverse video for mode lines.  If it
is non-@code{nil}, then mode lines are displayed in inverse video (under
X, this uses the face named @code{modeline}, which you can set as you
wish).  Otherwise, mode lines are displayed normally, just like text.
The default is @code{t}.
@end defopt

@node Usual Display
@section Usual Display Conventions

  The usual display conventions define how to display each character
code.  You can override these conventions by setting up a display table
(@pxref{Display Tables}).  Here are the usual display conventions:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Character codes 32 through 126 map to glyph codes 32 through 126.
Normally this means they display as themselves.

@item
Character code 9 is a horizontal tab.  It displays as whitespace
up to a position determined by @code{tab-width}.

@item
Character code 10 is a newline.

@item
All other codes in the range 0 through 31, and code 127, display in one
of two ways according to the value of @code{ctl-arrow}.  If it is is
non-@code{nil}, these codes map to sequences of two glyphs, where the
first glyph is the ASCII code for @samp{^}.  Otherwise, these codes map
just like the codes in the range 128 to 255.

@item
Character codes 128 through 255 map to sequences of four glyphs, where
the first glyph is the ASCII code for @samp{\}, and the others are digit
characters representing the code in octal.
@end itemize

  The usual display conventions apply even when there is a display
table, for any character whose entry in the active display table is
@code{nil}.  Thus, when you set up a display table, you need only
specify the the characters for which you want unusual behavior.

  These variables affect the way certain characters are displayed on the
screen.  Since they change the number of columns the characters occupy,
they also affect the indentation functions.

@defopt ctl-arrow
@cindex control characters in display
  This buffer-local variable controls how control characters are
displayed.  If it is non-@code{nil}, they are displayed as a caret
followed by the character: @samp{^A}.  If it is @code{nil}, they are
displayed as a backslash followed by three octal digits: @samp{\001}.
@end defopt

@c Following may have overfull hbox.
@defvar default-ctl-arrow
  The value of this variable is the default value for @code{ctl-arrow} in
buffers that do not override it.  This is the same as executing the
following expression:

@example
(default-value 'ctl-arrow)
@end example

@noindent
@xref{Default Value}.
@end defvar

@defopt tab-width
  The value of this variable is the spacing between tab stops used for
displaying tab characters in Emacs buffers.  The default is 8.  Note
that this feature is completely independent from the user-settable tab
stops used by the command @code{tab-to-tab-stop}.  @xref{Indent Tabs}.
@end defopt

@node Display Tables
@section Display Tables

Display tables are not currently implemented.

@ignore  Not in Lucid Emacs.
@cindex display table
You can use the @dfn{display table} feature to control how all 256
possible character codes display on the screen.  This is useful for
displaying European languages that have letters not in the ASCII
character set.

The display table maps each character code into a sequence of
@dfn{glyphs}, each glyph being an image that takes up one character
position on the screen.  You can also define how to display each glyph
on your terminal, using the @dfn{glyph table}.

@menu
* Display Table Format::	What a display table consists of.
* Active Display Table::	How Emacs selects a display table to use.
* Glyphs::			How to define a glyph, and what glyphs mean.
* ISO Latin 1::			How to use display tables
				  to support the ISO Latin 1 character set.
@end menu

@node Display Table Format
@subsection Display Table Format

  A display table is actually an array of 261 elements.

@defun make-display-table
This creates and returns a display table.  The table initially has
@code{nil} in all elements.
@end defun

  The first 256 elements correspond to character codes; the @var{n}th
element says how to display the character code @var{n}.  The value
should be @code{nil} or a vector of glyph values (@pxref{Glyphs}).  If
an element is @code{nil}, it says to display that character according to
the usual display conventions (@pxref{Usual Display}).

  The remaining five elements of a display table serve special purposes,
and @code{nil} means use the default stated below.

@table @asis
@item 256
The glyph for the end of a truncated screen line (the default for this
is @samp{$}).  @xref{Glyphs}.
@item 257
The glyph for the end of a continued line (the default is @samp{\}).
@item 258
The glyph for indicating a character displayed as an octal character
code (the default is @samp{\}).
@item 259
The glyph for indicating a control character (the default is @samp{^}).
@item 260
A vector of glyphs for indicating the presence of invisible lines (the
default is @samp{...}).  @xref{Selective Display}.
@end table

  For example, here is how to construct a display table that mimics the
effect of setting @code{ctl-arrow} to a non-@code{nil} value:

@example
(setq disptab (make-display-table))
(let ((i 0))
  (while (< i 32)
    (or (= i ?\t) (= i ?\n)
        (aset disptab i (vector ?^ (+ i 64))))
    (setq i (1+ i)))
  (aset disptab 127 (vector ?^ ??)))
@end example

@node Active Display Table
@subsection Active Display Table
@cindex active display table

  Each window can specify a display table, and so can each buffer.  When
a buffer @var{b} is displayed in window @var{w}, display uses the
display table for window @var{w} if it has one; otherwise, the display
table for buffer @var{b} if it has one; otherwise, the standard display
table if any.  The display table chosen is called the @dfn{active}
display table.

@defun window-display-table window
This function returns @var{window}'s display table, or @code{nil}
if @var{window} does not have an assigned display table.
@end defun

@defun set-window-display-table window table
This function sets the display table of @var{window} to @var{table}.
The argument @var{table} should be either a display table or
@code{nil}.
@end defun

@defvar buffer-display-table
This variable is automatically local in all buffers; its value in a
particular buffer is the display table for that buffer, or @code{nil} if
the buffer does not have any assigned display table.
@end defvar

@defvar standard-display-table
This variable's value is the default display table, used when neither
the current buffer nor the window displaying it has an assigned display
table.  This variable is @code{nil} by default.
@end defvar

  If neither the selected window nor the current buffer has a display
table, and if the variable @code{standard-display-table} is @code{nil},
then Emacs uses the usual display conventions.  @xref{Usual Display}.

@node Glyphs
@subsection Glyphs

@cindex glyph
  A @dfn{glyph} is a generalization of a character; it stands for an
image that takes up a single character position on the screen.  Glyphs
are represented in Lisp as integers, just as characters are.

@cindex glyph table
  The meaning of each integer, as a glyph, is defined by the glyph
table, which is the value of the variable @code{glyph-table}.

@defvar glyph-table
The value of this variable is the current glyph table.  It should be a
vector; the @var{g}th element defines glyph code @var{g}.  If the value
is @code{nil} instead of a vector, then all glyphs are simple (see
below).
@end defvar

  Here are the possible types of elements in the glyph table:

@table @var
@item integer
Define this glyph code as an alias for code @var{integer}.
This is used with X Windows to specify a face code.

@item string
Send the characters in @var{string} to the terminal to output
this glyph.  This alternative is available on character terminals,
but not under X.

@item @code{nil}
This glyph is simple.  On an ordinary terminal, the glyph code mod 256
is the character to output.  With X, the glyph code mod 256 is character
to output, and the glyph code divided by 256 specifies the @dfn{face id
number} to use while outputting it.  @xref{Faces}.
@end table

  If a glyph code is greater than or equal to the length of the glyph
table, that code is automatically simple.

@node ISO Latin 1
@subsection ISO Latin 1

If you have a terminal that can handle the entire ISO Latin 1 character
set, you can arrange to use that character set as follows:

@example
(require 'disp-table)
;; @r{Set char codes 160--255 to display as themselves.}
;; @r{(Codes 128--159 are the additional control characters.)}
(standard-display-8bit 160 255)
@end example

If you are editing buffers written in the ISO Latin 1 character set and
your terminal doesn't handle anything but ASCII, you can load the file
@file{iso-ascii} to set up a display table which makes the other ISO
characters display as sequences of ASCII characters.  For example, the
character ``o with umlaut'' displays as @samp{@{"o@}}.

Some European countries have terminals that don't support ISO Latin 1
but do support the special characters for that country's language.  You
can define a display table to work one language using such terminals.
For an example, see @file{lisp/iso-swed.el}, which handles certain
Swedish terminals.

You can load the appropriate display table for your terminal
automatically by writing a terminal-specific Lisp file for the terminal
type.
@end ignore

@node Beeping
@section Beeping
@cindex beeping
@cindex bell
@cindex sound

  You can make Emacs ring a bell (or blink the screen) to attract the
user's attention.  Be conservative about how often you do this; frequent
bells can become irritating.  Also be careful not to use beeping alone
when signaling an error is appropriate.  (@xref{Errors}.)

@defun ding &optional dont-terminate sound
@cindex keyboard macro termination
  This function beeps, or flashes the screen (see @code{visible-bell}
below).  It also terminates any keyboard macro currently executing
unless @var{dont-terminate} is non-@code{nil}.  If @var{sound} is
specified, it should be a symbol specifying which sound to make.  This
sound will be played if @code{visible-bell} is @code{nil}. (This only
works if sound support was compiled into the executable and you are
running on the console of a Sun SparcStation, SGI, or HP9000s700.
Otherwise you just get a beep.)
@end defun

@defun beep &optional dont-terminate sound
This is a synonym for @code{ding}.
@end defun

@defopt visible-bell
  This variable determines whether Emacs should flash the screen to
represent a bell.  Non-@code{nil} means yes, @code{nil} means no.  This
is effective only if the Termcap entry for the terminal in use has the
visible bell flag (@samp{vb}) set.
@end defopt

@defvar sound-alist
  This variable holds an alist associating names with sounds.  When
@code{beep} or @code{ding} is called with one of the name symbols, the
associated sound will be generated instead of the standard beep.

  Each element of @code{sound-alist} is a list describing a sound.  The
first element of the list is the name of the sound being defined.
Subsequent elements of the list are alternating keyword/value pairs:

@table @code
@item sound
A string of raw sound data, or the name of another sound to play.  The
symbol @code{t} here means use the default X beep.
@item volume
An integer from 0-100, defaulting to @code{bell-volume}.
@item pitch
If using the default X beep, the pitch (Hz) to generate.
@item duration
If using the default X beep, the duration (milliseconds).
@end table

For compatibility, elements of `sound-alist' may also be:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{( sound-name . <sound> )}
@item
@code{( sound-name <volume> <sound> )}
@end itemize

You should probably add things to this list by calling the function
@code{load-sound-file}.

Caveats:

@itemize @minus
@item
You can only play audio data if running on the console screen of a Sun
SparcStation, SGI, or HP9000s700.

@item
The pitch, duration, and volume options are available everywhere, but
many X servers ignore the `pitch' option.
@end itemize

The following beep-types are used by emacs itself:

@table @code
@item auto-save-error
when an auto-save does not succeed
@item command-error
when the emacs command loop catches an error
@item undefined-key
when you type a key that is undefined
@item undefined-click
when you use an undefined mouse-click combination
@item no-completion
during completing-read
@item y-or-n-p
when you type something other than 'y' or 'n'
@item yes-or-no-p
when you type something other than 'yes' or 'no'
@item default
used when nothing else is appropriate.
@end table

Other lisp packages may use other beep types, but these are the ones that
the C kernel of Emacs uses.
@end defvar

@defopt bell-volume
This variable specifies the default volume for sounds, from 0 to 100.
@end defopt

@deffn Command load-default-sounds
This function loads and installs some sound files as beep-types.
@end deffn

@deffn Command load-sound-file filename sound-name &optional volume
This function reads in an audio file and adds it to @code{sound-alist}.
The sound file must be in the Sun/NeXT U-LAW format.  @var{sound-name}
should be a symbol, specifying the name of the sound.  If @var{volume}
is specified, the sound will be played at that volume; otherwise, the
value of @var{bell-volume} will be used.
@end deffn

@defun play-sound sound &optional volume
This function plays sound @var{sound}, which should be a symbol
mentioned in @code{sound-alist}.  If @var{volume} is specified, it
overrides the value (if any) specified in @code{sound-alist}.
@end defun

@deffn Command play-sound-file file &optional volume
This function plays the named sound file at volume @var{volume},
which defaults to @code{bell-volume}.
@end deffn

@node Window Systems
@section Window Systems

  Emacs works with several window systems, most notably the X Window
System.  Note that both Emacs and X use the term ``window'', but use it
differently.  An Emacs screen is a single window as far as X is
concerned; the individual Emacs windows are not known to X at all.

@defvar window-system
@cindex X Window System
  This variable tells Lisp programs what window system Emacs is running
under.  Its value should be a symbol such as @code{x} (if Emacs is
running under X) or @code{nil} (if Emacs is running on an ordinary
terminal).
@end defvar

@defvar window-system-version
  This variable distinguishes between different versions of the X Window
System.  Its value is 10 or 11 when using X; @code{nil} otherwise.
@end defvar

@defvar window-setup-hook
This variable is a normal hook which Emacs runs after loading your
@file{.emacs} file and the default initialization file (if any), after
loading terminal-specific Lisp code, and after running the hook
@code{term-setup-hook}.

This hook is used for internal purposes: setting up communication with
the window system, and creating the initial window.  Users should not
interfere with it.
@end defvar
