			      EOS README

Eos ("Era on SPARCworks") is a lightweight editor integration for
SPARCworks3.0.  It uses the ToolTalk integration facilities available
in Era/Lemacs to register patterns that respond to the TooTalk
messages generated in SPARCworks 3.0.

Eos is already loaded in the Era binary image in this directory; it
will add a "SPARCworks" menu with a menu item which contains an
"Intro..."  button that will tell you about the package, an "Install
for SW3.0..."  button to simplify making the Debugger adjustments, and
ways to activate and deactivate the editor integration.  The
introduction message is reproduced at the end of this README file.

To load the package manually, load "eos-init" and then
"eos-start". The second component includes those actions that cannot
be dumped out into your xemacs.

Feedback is welcome; send mail to eos-comments@cs.uiuc.edu.

The editor integration is not a supported feature in SW3.0; the TT
messages are, though, and that is the key to making such an
integration possible.

	SunPro


======================================================================

		SPARCworks Editor Integration

Introduction

SPARCworks is a set of integrated programming tools from SunPro that
support the program development cycle. The tools are available in
different product packages and include "programming-in-the-small" tools
as well as groupware. SPARCworks tools communicate with one another using
ToolTalk.

Era/Lemacs is a version of the Emacs editor that provides interfaces
to the selection service and to the ToolTalk service.  The Eos package
("Era On Sparcworks") used these two interfaces to provide simple yet
useful editor integration with two SPARCworks tools: the SourceBrowser
and the Debugger.

To use this integration, the user starts the SourceBrowser and the
Debugger requesting that they do not contain a source pane, and then
selects any Era screen (that is, a top-level X11 window) as the source
display for the SourceBrowser and the Debugger.  The user then
interacts with the Era/Lemacs screen in a way very similar to how the
source panes of the SW tools were used.

Instructions

To use the editor integration, first start Era/Lemacs; its menu bar
will have a menu titled SPARCworks. This menu contains four menu
items, one to obtain this introductory message, another to perform
customization for SW3.0 (needed for Debugger, not needed for
SourceBrowser), and two more to control what Era/Lemacs screen to use
(if any) for presenting source code.

Next select an Era/Lemacs screen to be used to display SourceBrowser
or Debugger sources; do this by using the menu items Select for
SBrowser and Select for Debugger. Both menu items toggle to deselect a
screen for the tool.  If no screens are selected for a given tool, the
editor integration for that tool is disabled.

After doing any needed customization, start the desired SPARCworks
tool. Eos uses glyphs in a manner similar to how they are used in the
source panes of the Source Browser and the Debugger. The main mode of
interaction is to click on command buttons in the Source Browser and
Debugger to invoke operations that operate on the selection or its
position.

Start the SourceBrowser with the -editor flag. All SourceBrowser
commands will work as expected, except that only the current match of
the current query will be given a glyph.  Next and prev will change
the current match and the selected Era/Lemacs screen will display it.
Requesting Source in the Call Grapher, the Class Grapher and the Class
Browser will show the source in the selected Era/Lemacs screen.

Start the debugger as usual (the -editor flag is not implemented) All
commands that operate on the contents of the selection will work as
expected.  Operations like up and down (done either in the command
pane or in the Stack Inspector) will work as expected.  The Debugger
commands: Stop At and Clear operate on the position of the
selection. In SPARCworks 3.0, these commands do not work when the
selection is owned by Era/Lemacs; therefore, an extension file has
been provided for the Debugger that contains two replacements that
work as expected. If you follow the instructions in Install SW3.0 from
the SPARCworks menu, the two original buttons will be replaced with
new buttons, which use the new commands.

Disclaimers

The preceeding user model is not necessarily indicative of any future
directions for SPARCworks; however, you are encouraged to send us
feedback via the Comments button in the About Box of either SPARCworks
tool.

The lightweight editor integration is not a supported feature in
SW3.0; the TT messages are supported, though, and that is the key to
making such an integration possible.

Enjoy.

	SunPro.
